and dr. Simon said will you please tell
me a little more in greater details
about this hip impingement and hip
resurfacing Thank You dr. Jacobson I'd
be glad to hip impingement is a
diagnosis that's relatively recently
been discovered so to speak it's been a
hidden diagnosis until this past decade
and it actually is a relatively common
problem and probably existed previously
but just was undiagnosed and it's
related to the abnormal shape of a hip
ball or to the socket as you showed us
nicely and it can but it can also occur
in a relatively normal ball and socket
as well but that happens usually when
there's excessive movement or from
related to either laxity of the hip
capsule or excessive range of motion in
a patient either due to their activity
level or due to their there lacks to do
their hip most cases though are related
to perinatal structural deformities
which occur in utero and we think at
this point in time that many of them are
familial some can also though occur due
to childhood developmental conditions
such as slip capital firm Oh TIFF
assists which happens in the early years
of childhood and can result in the hip
growing abnormally or the ball growing
abnormally related to chronic fracture
or other conditions which results in the
head also becoming misshapen and thus
resulting in the impinging problem as
well and as we start to understand more
and more of this worse understanding
that there's a continuum of this problem
one can be very mild and may not
manifest itself until very later in life
and others with more severe
incongruencies related to the head or
the socket which can result in
significant problems either related to
pain or arthritis at an earlier age and
so this is leading us to understand
though that probably one of the single
most common causes of osteoarthritis is
probably related to hip impingement so
it's an important diagnosis for all of
us to understand
now the type of patients that I usually
see with this type of problem frequently
present under the age of 50 and their
pain is localized right into their grind
and they particularly describe the pain
as being worse with exertion they
frequently have loss of motion and
particularly in hip flexion or bending
of the hip trying to bring their knee up
to their chest so to speak and this is
either due to the fact that they are
very painful doing this maneuver because
of torn structures which we'll talk
about or their structural abnormalities
just will not allow it because of
impingement of the ball against the
socket now this is a very subtle
diagnosis and that's probably one of the
reasons it's the hidden diagnosis for so
many years but there are significant
clues that we're starting to find out
that help us understand it but just to
show you how difficult the diagnosis can
be that there's frequently on average
about five years from the time of
symptoms to the time of diagnosis and
many times patients will see more than
one doctor before the diagnosis is made
and sometimes by the time the diagnosis
is made the progression of the disease
process is beyond that that can be taken
care of with a non Arthur plastic
options so first of all to understand
this better I think it's helpful to show
what we consider the normal functional
anatomy of the hip you can see that the
hip as dr. Kenny is going to point out
for us is essentially a round ball that
fits in a socket that's exactly matches
the round sphere of the head and the
angle of that socket is slightly
inclined so that this front half of the
socket is slightly in front of the back
half of the socket which allows the hip
to flex fully there's also several other
very important structures as dr.
Jacobson described which is the labrum
in the front and back of the socket and
these are like a gasket and concealed
the synovial fluid and have actually
helped preserve the hip socket long term
when the hip is flexed the articular
surface normally which
involves almost the entire part of the
head as dr. Kenny will describe here
goes almost all the way down to the neck
so that when the hip goes up into
flexion the entire part of the articular
socket our surface goes into the socket
and at the front of the neck does not
really in because the front edge of the
socket is slightly recessed in normal
anatomy contrast that to a cam shaped
head which is what we're going to talk
about today which is basically a head
which is just too big or oval shaped and
so it won't actually rotate into a
spherical socket or the socket can have
too much over coverage and sometimes it
can actually result in even a normal
head and pinching on the socket and then
as I talked about previously too much
laxity allowing too much movement can
even cause a normal hip to impinge and
all these three just different ways of
cause new pigment can result in the
labrum becoming torn and when the labrum
Storn it become can become painful and
lessen lubrication and potentially
result in arthritic symptoms and because
of increased friction of the hip I've
tried to show what this is basically
like by taking an MRI and actually
overlay in an egg shape to it which
would simulate what the head would be
like now if you can imagine this head
going up into flexion it would first of
all start to push as dr. Kenny will
illustrate onto the red portion of the
labrum and the anterior what we call the
front of the socket this can result in
pain and it of itself but with this
happens repetitively for years can
actually result in the labrum being torn
off of the articular cartilage and once
the tear has occurred then actually
caused significant pressure on the front
edge of the articular surface resulting
in our thrip with arthritis so hip
impingement basically presents a patient
who is limiting their activities by pain
particularly reflection and they have
failed conservative measures and they're
difficult to discern whether these are
simply due to impingement because other
condition
can simulate if impingement we need to
have different ways to very clearly
understand whether it's from hip
impingement or from for example a back
problem or other type of problem related
to the groin anatomy so that we have
actually several helpful tests and the
most predominant ones that we use our
x-rays which can be very helpful if shot
in the right projection in this
particular case the lateral view looking
too so we can see the front edge of the
neck and head and the socket as well as
the back edge and we can compare and at
what we call MRI arthrography which is
basically an MRI after the hip has been
injected with a fluid that's a special
dye that you can see on MRI which
outlines the labrum nicely and also at
the same time we inject local anesthetic
in the same syringe and that can
actually be very helpful because then we
can eliminate any pain for even a short
period with the duration of the local
anesthetic and that will hurt us that
whatever pain is being relieved is
coming from inside the hip capsule and
frequently as the impinging situation